Hey Thoughty2 here. Earlier this year Facebook
was working on a new highly-intelligent AI
chatbot that could talk to and negotiate with
humans in a realistic manner. When one Facebook
engineer had the bright idea to take two of
these AI bots and let them talk to each other,
that's when something unexpected and terrifying
happened. The two AIs invented their own language
that us humans couldn't understand and began
using it to talk to each other.
Here's a snippet of what the two bots, named
Bob and Alice said to each other:
Bob: I can i i everything else
Alice: balls have zero to me to me to me to
me to me to me to me to me to
Bob: you i everything else
Alice: balls have a ball to me to me to me
to me to me to me to me to me
The Facebook engineers had no idea what they
where talking about, but it was very clear
that the AIs did. They had invented their
own secret code to converse using the power
of artificial neural networks. International
news soon reported that Facebook forcefully
shut down the experiment due to concerns that
the AIs were becoming too smart, getting out
of control and to prevent a Skynet situation.
This isn't entirely true, yes, they did shut
it down right away, but because they were
trying to create an AI that could talk to
humans and if it was going to take the liberty
to invent its own language then that wasn't
much use and so the experiment was a failure,
in that respect. But nevertheless, this is
still really creepy. As we continue to advance
Artificial Intelligence technology and push
the boundaries further and further every year,
what happens when they do become self-aware,
sentient beings that are more intelligent
than us humans? Could AI take over the world?
And will it be in our lifetimes?
Artificial Intelligence, the ability for computers
to think at a human level and beyond and to
self replicate is not a dystopian vision of
the future, it is hear, it is now, it is happening.
Most people are unaware at the phenomenal
rate that our AI systems have improved over
the past five years and the trend is only
getting steeper and steeper. You may not realise
but you use AI every day, we all do. Virtual
Assistants like Google Assistant, Siri and
Alexa are obvious examples of cutting edge
artificial intelligence, but it's also used
in many really subtle ways that affect your
everyday life.
When you see music recommendations on Spotify
and film suggestions on Netflix, there is
a highly complex computer algorithm behind
that, an algorithm that teaches itself with
passing time, an AI. This is known as machine
learning and large retailers such as Amazon
have been using machine learning algorithms
for many years now, to predict what you want
to buy, perhaps before you even know yourself.
In one infamous case in 2014 American retailer
Target Stores used artificial intelligence
to predict that a teenage girl was pregnant,
before any of her family members knew and
before she was even sure of it herself.
Target's cleverly designed machine learning
algorithms had detected that this particular
Minnesota teenager's buying habits had changed
slightly. Over the past couple of months,
she had begun purchasing scent-free soap and
extra large bags of cotton wool balls. Upon
seeing his daughter's mail one day, the girl's
father stormed into his nearest Target store
and said the following to the store manager:
“My daughter got this in the mail! She’s
still in high school, and you’re sending
her coupons for baby clothes and cribs? Are
you trying to encourage her to get pregnant?”
A short while later, the store manager received
a phone call from the abashed father in which
he said: “I had a talk with my daughter.
It turns out there’s been some activities
in my house I haven’t been completely aware
of. She’s due in August. I owe you an apology.”
So to answer the question, is AI smarter than
human's yet? The answer is perhaps not all
of them, but smarter than one slightly naive
Minnesota father, absolutely.
Moore's law states that every year the amount
of transistors in computer processing units
will double. This has held true every single
year since Gordon Moore theorised it and the
first CPU was invented in 1971. So whilst
superhuman artificial intelligence may not
be among us just yet, many futurists predict
its advent could happen any time within the
next 50 years, some say it could be far sooner
than that, in as little as 10 years time.
Some of the most intelligent individuals in
the world who deal with futuristic technology
every single day have repeatedly warned that
AI could be the most dangerous thing we ever
create and our greatest ever existential threat.
Stephen Hawkins has made numerous pleas to
the global scientific community to tread carefully
with AI, or face our own damnation and Elon
Musk is constantly expressing his concerns.
In an interview Musk recently stated that
with artificial intelligence we are "Summoning
the devil".
Many people who truly understand the power
and dangers of Artificial Intelligence have
called it the "Last invention we'll ever make
- the last challenge we'll ever face". Because
when the time comes, if we do get it wrong
and we do lose control, there will be a final
challenge, a final war, a war against software,
a war that we cannot win. Because the AI will
be so many millions times more intelligent
than the entire human race, so whatever plan
we come up with, whatever we try to do to
regain power and destroy the AI, the AI will
have already thought of well in advance. It
would be like ants attempting to wage a war
on humans. Except many thousands of times
harder.
From our perspective, as a species, we feel
like we are supremely intelligent, compared
to our more primitive animal cousins. But
in reality, humans are only fractionally more
intelligent than say, an ape. But that tiny
fraction of increased intelligence has allowed
us to develop tools, language and thus civilisation.
If we were to plot the intelligence of every
animal on planet earth on a graph from one
to one thousand, if mice are at 1, then chimpanzees
would be at 4 and dolphins at 8, then that
would place humans at a grand total of...
10. Whereas a super intelligent AI would easily
be at 1,000, and likely many times higher.
Our brains are the most complex organism we
have discovered in the entire universe but
as marvellous as they are, they are, at the
end of the day, limited. They are confined
within our skulls, with only limited room
for neurons. An AI would have no such limits,
our computing power isn't yet fast enough,
but when the time comes in the very near future,
and it will due to exponential growth, when
computer processors are many thousands of
times more powerful than they are today, AIs
will have access to as much computer processing
power as they desire. And since software can
travel at the speed of light, all over the
globe, there are truly no limits to how powerful
an AI can grow. Add on top of that the fact
that shortly after a super AIs conception,
it will most likely design its own faster,
smaller and more transient hardware to run
on, hardware more powerful than humans could
ever fathom.
Before the AIs do take over and your brain
becomes irrelevant, you should make the most
of it whilst you still can. That's why I regularly
use Skillshare to sharpen up my skills, an
online learning community with more than 17,000
classes in IT, web development, game design
and all kinds of exciting lifestyle, business
and creative pursuits. Premium Membership
gives you unlimited access to high quality
classes from experts working in their fields,
so you can improve your skills, unlock new
opportunities, and do the work you truly love.
I really enjoyed learning about how artificial
intelligence can be used to improve peoples
lives and real world problems by watching
the Skillshare course "Goal-Driven Artificial
Intelligence and Machine Learning" If you
want to create your own AI then you should
definitely give this course a go. Skillshare
is also more affordable than most learning
platforms out there: an annual subscription
is less than $10 a month. But since Skillshare
have supported me on this video I am able
to offer the first 500 people who click the
link in the description, 2 months of Skillshare
premium for free, so give it a go today, there's
no risk.
The very moment in time when humans create
such a super intelligence - an artificial
intelligence that can re-write its own software
and becomes just one percent more intelligent
that humans has a name. This theoretical event
is called the "Singularity". Such an AI is
known within the scientific community as Artificial
General Intelligence, all the AI we have created
to date is Artificial Narrow Intelligence,
or weak AI, since it only operates within
specific boundaries and performs pre-designated
tasks, such as shopping recommendations. But
a general AI would be essentially creating
a sentient being, creating new life.
Recently the worlds greatest thinkers in the
fields of AI and futurism were surveyed on
what year they think the singularity will
happen, when will we create general AI? The
average answer was 2040, just over 20 years
from now but some scientists have said it
could happen as soon as 2029. Our current
technology is not even remotely close, but
in only 10 years it's highly likely that it
will be, because human progression and innovation
is and always has been exponential, it is
not linear. In the past 50 years we have made
more advances in technology than over the
entire history of the human race, and over
just the past 10 years, we have made more
technological advances than the previous 50.
Futurist and chief Google Engineer Ray Kurzweil
estimates that by 2021, we will be making
more advances and new discoveries in just
one year than we have over the entire past
century. This is known as the Law of Accelerating
Returns.
98% of the scientific community agree that
the singularity will definitely happen and
most of them believe it will happen in our
lifetimes. So what will happen to the human
race? Well, the fact is, we don't know and
we can never know, until the moment it happens.
One thing that all AI researchers agree strongly
on is that when the singularity happens one
of two extremes will happen - the human race
will either become extinct or become immortal.
When creating AI we are essentially creating
a god, and we can't know if it will be a kind
god or an evil god until its too late. This
is because the AI will be so many magnitudes
smarter than us, so our puny minds can't even
begin to imagine what a being of such supreme
intelligence would be interested in. What
would its desires, hopes, ideologies and morals
be?
If this omniscient AI turns out to be a merciful
god the future will be an incredibly exciting
time but we'll look at that in a minute. Let's
first take a look at scenario number one,
the extinction of the human race. Because,
you know, it's nice to get all the doom and
gloom out of the way. If evolution has taught
us one thing it's that a species will do whatever
it can in its power to survive and reproduce.
There's no reason why AI would be any different.
Our planet contains limited resources and
if the AI deems the entire human race as an
unnecessary consumer of said precious resources,
then it could decide to terminate us to free
up all those lovely resources and energy
The only reason humans are civil and decent
to other humans, most of the time, is because
they view them as intelligent beings. Why
do we find it so easy and guilt-free to swat
a fly yet we wouldn't instantly condemn a
stray dog to its death if it found its way
into our home? Because the dog is more intelligent
than the fly, so humans, for some reason,
believe that that particular creature's life
is worth more, due to its intelligence. This
is called humanisation and its an ability
that psychopaths don't possess, their lack
of empathy when harming others comes from
the fact that they are unable to humanise
their peers, they see them as lesser beings.
So many Nazis felt comfortable and proud with
mercilessly slaughtering millions of Jews,
because Hitler had quite wrongly portrayed
them as less intelligent and less worthy beings
than the German peoples - he had de-humanised
them.
An AI would be so many magnitudes more intelligent
than us that the chance of them de-humanising
us and seeing us more as a pest, similar to
how we see ants and mosquitos, is very high.
This would erase any moral guilt they could
potentially have about committing genocide.
And how would they go about said genocide?
It would be a grand plan so intelligent and
complex that we can neither predict it nor
see it coming. Something like, the AI creating
trillions of nano robots that would enter
into the bloodstreams of every human on Earth
undetected and then, simultaneously release
a tiny quantity of the most toxic poison that
the AI is capable of creating, instantly killing
over 7 billion people.
We have no idea how a super AI would think,
it could be because of the most basic oversight
in its design. For example, if we create an
AI to grow potatoes for us and its primary
goal is to grow as many potatoes as possible.
It could one day decide that to grow more
potatoes it needs more land and humans are
taking up that land, so it eradicates all
life on Earth, so it can have more room for
potato fields. This seems like a stupid prospect,
but its entirely possible, because we don't
know what the motives would be of an AI, there
is no guarantee it would view life with the
same esteem as we do. One thing that will
not happen is the classic Hollywood image
of killer robots out of control. Such "hardware"
would be far too primitive and rudimentary
for a super AI, it's choice of weaponry would
be something we don't even know exists yet
and something far more effective and terrifying.
But what about the more cheerful outcome?
When the singularity hits, what if we discover
that our new sentient overlord is merciful
and kind, then boy are we in for a wild and
exciting future. Once the AI reaches levels
of intelligence many thousands or even millions
of times that of the human race there are
essentially three roles that it could take
within our world.
It could act as an oracle, doing no more than
answering any question we ask it. Such as
"How do we solve world hunger?", "How can
we build a time travel machine?", "What is
the answer to life, the universe and everything?".
So it would essentially be Deep Thought.
The second role it could undertake would be
more like a super intelligent servant, a genie
if you like, where it would actually enact
what we asked of it. A super-intelligent being
would very likely know how to modify, dissemble
and re-assemble atoms and even particles,
and build anything it likes. So we could ask
it to build us a time machine, and it would,
using some advanced atomic-level construction
technique that us humans couldn't even begin
to comprehend.
The final role it could take on is a ruler,
overlord or sovereign. Basically, a god. When
the singularity happens there will be an intelligence
explosion, because of the recursive self-improvement
that the AI will be capable of, it will shoot
past human level intelligence like a rocket.
Within days, possibly even hours it will have
solved world hunger, cured all diseases and
hereditary conditions, reinvented human transportation,
possibly even introducing us to teleportation
and figured out the most stable and fair political
and economic systems to run our world. But
all this is only the beginning.
When I say we will have created a god, I'm
not exaggerating. The AI will effortlessly
be able to create and destroy life and shape
the very earth itself. Think about it, for
a few years now scientists have been able
to manipulate and move individual atoms in
the lab. If it's possible for us dumb humans
to move atoms then it goes without saying
that a super-intelligent being could effortlessly
rearrange billions of atoms all at once, meaning
nothing in the universe will be safe from
its touch. The AI god could move mountains
and part the seas, Moses-style. Anything and
everything could be transmuted into something
else. Garbage could be transformed into bags
of rice or even chunks of meat, we would no
longer need to farm animals because atomically-identical
meat and other foods could be created out
of anything.
This of course leads to immortality. If the
AI can re-arrange atoms then it could, theoretically
create an anti-aging box that an eighty-year-old
could walk into and come out the other side
twenty-years-old again. The AI could even
create super-intelligent nano bots that would
permenantly live inside all of us and would
constantly repair damaged cells, so we would
no longer age. After all the body is like
a car, if we can repair it from the inside
it will keep going forever. The human body
is just a lot more complex than a car engine,
but it would be child's play to a super AI.
And if we were to get knocked down by a bus?
No problem, we could of course ask the AI
to back up our brains in advance and a new
body, even a new identical brain, could easily
be created and the backup be restored, if
the worst were to happen to us. We truly would
become immortal.
Of course, we would eventually come to the
realisation that our bodies and limited brains
are only holding us back. We would eventually
abandon our physical bodies and upload ourselves
into a new digital realm, where we too would
become an AI, just as intelligent as the AI
god that we created. And once we have all
become sentient, space travel would be a breeze,
since we would all be software, we could simply
beam ourselves on a laser beam to other planets
and other galaxies.
All I have talked about seems like science
fiction, possibly scenarios that could unfold
thousands of years in the future, but the
terrifying reality is that we are on the very
cusp of all this happening within the next
fifty to one hundre years or sooner, the majority
of the world's greatest scientists agree with
this. So the next twenty to fifty years are
going to be either terrifying or exciting,
but one thing is for sure, we are about to
create our very last and the most significant
invention in our entire 2.5 million year lifetime
as the human race. Thanks for watching.